---
id: 009B
title: "using vacation to your advantage"
sidebar_label: "marathon learning (satyam)"
---

## do you get semester breaks?

Since my childhood, holidays exclusively meant 'a Sunday's affair'; be it in my schooldays, collegedays and even in D.A.V. where I started off my job as a teacher. Yes, this is also true that I have been getting lengthier vacations since my schoodays like the summer vacations,winter vacations, post-exam holidays which later turned into semester break. Even today, I get about 10-40 days of vacations in a pack in my teaching work. So, like Tanay, I am not able to take any advantage of my weekends but I have made sure of utilizing my bulk holidays to the hilt into improving myself.

That being said, my suggestions in this chapter would find itself useful especially for students who get semester breaks after their exams or similar such breaks. Well, if somebody really wants to be in the process of betterment, he/she can always take a break from their job and execute some of my suggestions. In explaining the chapter efficiently, I would be bringing up three such short stories from my life which has proved helpful in improving myself. You can easily relate yourself to the events.

## finding myself through meditation

The first incident is of the summer vacation of 2002 wherein I stayed for a few days at my elder brother's ashram in Delhi. In those nearly twenty days, I experienced a lot of changes on a spiritual level within me. For the very first time, I participated in group meditation, group dynamic and other different types of spiritual activity. I with my elder brother met other spiritual people there as well. I also got the opportunity to live there in a quiet and secluded environment. Today, the sense of spiritual peace and bliss that I carry, a large part of its contribution is courtesy those twenty days.

It helps me to remain untroubled in difficult situations of life and to keep myself buoyant. Drawing upon from the experience of this vacation, I would suggest eveybody that whenever in life you have this chance to go solo on a long vacation, you should choose to stay with a similar spiritual group and experience Yoga, asana, pranayama, meditation, etc. collectively. Alternatively, you can always choose a small yoga and meditation-related course if possible. And ofcourse, if this course happens to be under patronage of a qualified teacher alongwith the grace of nature, certainly your experience would multiply.

## the introspection of what next

The second incident that I would open up here should more aptly be referred to as the emergence of a new kind of thinking than to call it an incident. I was sitting quiet and lonely in the games room of my school after the final exams of 2008 had ended. I was confronted with this thought there, that I have been teaching students of class XII for the last eight years even though I did not had a master's degree in my subject and this was wrong as per rules. Another thought that crept in was that now I had two ways to spend my life. The first one being the easier one, which most teachers take up is of considering the job that they have got to be their destiny and live all of their life accordingly or, the second one which is a bit difficut, but thrilling, exciting, and full of joy is to choose to keep trying to improve oneself. After much consideration, I decided to choose the second option of pursuing M.P.Ed. to improve myself, knowing fully well that for this I would have to remain unpaid for 18 months and spend almost all the money I have saved while working in the last eight years.

Perhaps, its only for the ability to take such difficult decisions, I find myself different from other ordinary people today. Here, I would also like to mention that my family's financial situation was not so good when I got my B.P.Ed. degree in 1999 that could allow me to further my studies. So, I joined in as soon as I got the job. To study again after leaving it for nine full years was not going to be a cakewalk but I took it as a challenge and I feel overjoyed and proud to tell you that I ranked first even after being among those students in my college who were doing their studies without the kind of breaks that I had. While completing M.P. Ed., I spent the summer vacation of 2009 with my family, which is one of the most memorable holidays in my life, one from which I have learned a lot, and therby I have mentioned it here as the third incident.

However, after my that tough decision of 2008, except for 2009, I have utilized all my holidays to either read something new or to learn something new. If I hadn't taken the difficult decision to pursue M.P.Ed at that time, I would neither have obtained my Ph.D. degree nor would I have qualified UGC NET. Apart from this, I have also completed many other small courses during my holidays which has increased my knowledge and confidence considerably. It was only while working that I represented the Jharkhand Senior National Volleyball team twice.

## resolution must be absolute

On the basis of this whole incident, I want to convince you that if you want to use any of your vacations properly whether it is small or big, you must first decide to improve yourself with full resoluteness. Remember one thing, whenever you go for a job interview, they do not care about how much you need the job, rather they care about how capable and useful you are. And this goes without saying that if you want to succeed in life, then be constantly trying to make yourself competent and skilful. According to where you want to see yourself in the next five years, keep small courses or other useful seminars and workshops pre-planned for every small and big holidays. Keep reading books according to your goals and maintaining notes of whatever learning you take in, which would eventually become a tool to recall the whole book in minutes.

## family trips

The third incident that I would like to mention here is of the travel that I had with my family to various hill areas and pilgrimage sites in Uttarakhand. Two of the main pilgrimages being Kedarnath and Badrinath. To visit the main temple in these two pilgrimages, we had to ascend to the high mountains, where the temperature and other conditions were in no way native to us. There was extreme cold in those high altitudes and none of us knew anything about staying in such a cold weather. Well, we had completed the entire journey of Kedarnath on foot itself. My elder son Nitya was only three years old at that time. I carried him on my back itself for about seven kilometres of the travel.

This journey helped in strengthening us physically and mentally more than before and also worked to increase our willpower. We encountered several indelible moments throughout the course of the travel. Whenever any of us got sick, we all responded in harmony like a good team. We stopped at many places on our way which we had not planned beforehand, but as soon as someone expressed admiration about a place on inquiry or we liked any place, we had our stopover there for some time. Even today when I call that trip to mind, those moments spent with nature and family fill me with joy and excitement. We experienced a blend of both fatigue and adventure during the mountaineering. This journey unknowingly also taught us a lot.

Based on the experience of this holiday, I feel that if you want to spend some time with your family which is full of thrills and priceless experiences and one which strengthens your determination, then you must also do something exciting like in my case taking up an adventurous trip with family atleast once in five years. You can choose among any the beautiful natural places for this purpose.

## some more ideas

Apart from these at the end of this chapter, I am sharing some tips for those who are availing their weekend holidays. So that, it will seem more relevant to the chapters title.

1. You can clean or adjust your home and surroundings -- It is said by the great indian poet Nida Fazli, " Apna gum le ke kahin aur naa jaaya jaaye. Ghar me bikhri hui chijon ko sajaya jaaye." It means one should not go outside home with his sorrow and anger rather he should decorate his own home. It is psychologically correct. When you clean and decorate your surrounding it has a good impact over you too. You can try it for few hours of your weekends.
1. Plan to spend a good time with your family and friends -- It is said, "Ankh se door na ho dil se utar jaayega. Waqt ka kya hai gujarta hai guzar jaayega." It simply means out of sight out of mind. Why we really want success in our life ? A wise person will answer, " To enjoy my life with my family and friends. And to become more useful for the society as well." So in the process of success don't forget to plan spending good times with your family and friends at least once in a month.
1. _You can try some new type of exercise dose suitable for your body_ I will not write here anything. If you have already read our chapter on exercise you know why it is so important and how to apply this method. If you haven't read yet after going through that chapter it will be all clear to you.
1. You can write blog/article/story/poem on some new interesting topic or can complete such stuffs if you have started -- Creativity keeps your brain agile and alive. It makes your life more meaningful. So I suggest you if you had planned to go for a trip or somewhere outside but due to extreme weather or other such reason you have to cancel it just shift your time and energy in writing on some new topic or complete the incompleted ones.
1. _You can update and rearrange your social accounts_ Like the third point I am not going to explain here about the cause, method and importance of this. You should read our chapter about importance and use of social media for your success.
1. _You can spend time in searching and applying new jobs and making your resume more effective_ If you have got a job and you are very much satisfied with that in all aspects then this point is not useful for you but if it not so And as research data shows more than 80% are not satisfied) then in weekends you should apply at all the suitable posts for you and always try to make your resume more effective as it shows your first impression to the HR and selection board.
1. _You can plan to spend some extra time with yourself_ It is said, "If you are not meditating and if you are not spending a quality time with yourself you are missing to meet the most important and valuable person in your life."
1. It is also said, _"The man has burn alone and he will die alone. The rest all is a drama."_ So we shouldn't miss the opportunity to spend a good time with ourselves especially when we are to ask some questions to ourselves. You can spend some hours or even full day in silence and solitude for your inner growth as I have mentioned earlier in this chapter when I was in my elder brother's ashram.
1. _You should take a time to plan the next week_ If you want to be more productive you should take time in planning and scheduling the works and projects have to be completed in coming weeks well in advance. As it is said, " Proper prior planning prevents poor performance. "
   There are many more things which you can do according to your area of interest in the weekends but always focus on your worthy goal of your life while planning and using your weekends.

Good wishes to all of you for spending rest of your weekends the best of your weekends.
